This lecture talks about software
engineering and what it means for
data science.
For data scientists,
software is the generalization of
a specific aspect of a data analysis.
So if specific parts of a data
analysis may require implementing or
applying a number of procedures or
tools together.
Software is the encompassing of all
these tools into a specific module or
procedure that can be repeatedly
applied in a variety of settings.
So software allows for the systematizing
and the standardizing of a procedure, so
that different people can use it and
understand what it's gonna do,
at any given time.
What software is useful for,
is that it formalizes and abstracts the
functionality of a set of procedures or
tools, by developing a well
defined interface to the analysis.
So the software will have an interface,
or a set of inputs and
a set of outputs that are well understood.
And people can understand the inputs and
the outputs
without having to worry about the gory
details of what's going on underneath.
Now they may be interested
in those details, but
the application of the software
at any given setting
will not necessarily depend on
the knowledge of those details.
Rather the knowledge of the interface
to that software is important
to using it in any given situation.
So for example, most statistical
packages will have a linear regression,
a function which has a very well
defined interface, usually.
For example, you'll have to input
things like the outcome and the set of
predictors, and maybe there will be some
other inputs like the data set or weights.
But most linear regression
functions kind of work in that way.
And importantly the user does not
have to know exactly how the linear
regression calculation is
done underneath the hood.
Rather, they only need to know that
they need to specify the outcome,
the predictors, and
a couple of other things.
And so the linear regression
function abstracts all the details
that go on underneath, that are required
to implement linear regression, so
that the user can apply the tool
in a variety of settings.
So there are basically three kind of
levels of software that I can think about,
going from kind of the simplest
to the most abstract.
And so at the first level you might just
have some code that you wrote, and so
this is really the first step towards
encapsulating automation of a set
of procedures.
For example,
you might have a loop of some sort,
never repeats an operation multiple times.
So this is the first tip.
And then the next step might
be some sort of function.
So regardless of what language you may be
using, often there will be some notion of
a function, which is used to
encapsulate a set of instructions.
And the key thing about a function is
that you'll have to define some sort of
interface, which will be
the inputs to the function.
And then the function may
have a set of outputs or
it may have some side effect for
example, if it's a plotting function.
And then, so the user only
needs to know those inputs and
kind of what the outputs will be.
And so this is kind of the first level
of abstraction that you might encounter,
where you have to actually define and
interface to that function.
And then the very highest level
is the actual software package.
Which will often be a collection of
functions or functions in other things.
That will be a little bit more
formal because there'll be a very
specific interface or
API that a user has to understand.
And often for a software package there'll
be a level of convenience features for
users, like documentation, or examples,
or tutorials that may come with it,
to help the user, to kind of apply
the software to many different settings.
So a full on software package will
be most general in the sense that
it should be applicable to
kind of more than one setting.
And maybe become more
broadly useful to people.
So, one question that you'll find yourself
asking, is at what point do you need to
systematize common tasks and procedures
across projects versus, you know,
recreating code or writing new code
from scratch on every new project?
Now it depends on a variety of factors and
answering this question may require
communication within your team, and with
people outside of your team potentially.
Because you may need to have
an understanding of how often a given
process is repeated, or how often
a given type of data analysis is done,
in order to weigh the costs and
the benefits of kind
of investing in either a software
package or something like that.
And so within your team,
you may want to ask yourself,
is the data analysis you're gonna do, is
that something you're gonna build upon for
future work, or
is it just gonna be a one shot deal.
Now in my experience, there are relatively
few one shot deals out there.
Often you will have to
do a certain analysis or
a certain type of analysis more than once,
twice, or even three times.
And at that point, it's usually often,
you've kind of reached the threshold where
you wanna write some code, write some
software, or at least a function.
So the point at which you need to
systematize a given set of procedures,
is probably gonna be sooner
than you think it is.
Because things will more
likely be done more than once.
Now the initial investment for developing
more formal software will be higher,
of course, but that will likely pay
off in savings in time down the road.
So my basic rule of thumb is that,
if you're gonna do something once,
that does happen on occasion, just write
some code and document it very well.
The important thing is that you wanna make
sure that you understand what the code
does, and so that requires both writing
the code well and writing documentation.
Cuz you wanna be able to reproduce it down
the road, in case you ever come back to
it, or in case someone else comes back to
it, and needs to understand what was done.
If you're gonna do something twice,
write a function.
This allows you to abstract
a small piece of code,
it forces you to define an interface, so
you have well defined inputs and outputs.
And that will allow for other people
to access a given function and
apply it to whatever situation they're in.
And then if you're gonna do
something three times or more,
you should think about
writing a small package.
It doesn't have to be
commercial level software.
But a small package which encapsulates
the set of operations that you're
gonna be doing in a given analysis.
And also write some real documentation so
that people can understand what's supposed
to be going on, and can apply the software
to a different situation if they have to.